[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of Gaiam Inspirations,
and we are broadcasting
from the Conscious Life
Expo in Los Angeles.
So it is true, we are
experiencing weather patterns
that are breaking
records every single day.
There's been a dramatic
increase in the number
of devastating floods,
and frosts, and wildfires.
And it seems like that we're
hearing about new climate
extremes in the news
every single day.
So the question is, how long are
we going to be shocked by this?
It seems to be the new norm.
And that is exactly what
we're talking about today
with Gregg Braden.
He's a geologist
and a scientist.
He has a great new
book out addressing
this issue called The
Turning Point: Creating
a Resilience in a Time
of Extremes, which
is what we need.
How do we create resilience?
Every single day there's
a breaking record.
>>GREGG BRADEN: It is.
The best minds of
our time, Lisa,
are telling us in
fact that we are
living with a culling,
a time of extremes.
And I think this is important
to say in a very real way.
It doesn't mean that extremes
are bad things or even
good things for that matter.
It's means they're big things.
And I think our audience and
certainly relate to that.
Big stuff happening in the world
every time you turn around.
Of all of the big things
that are happening,
they fall in a few categories.
Climate is certainly
one of those.
The economy is
certainly one of those.
Energy, where our
energy comes from.
The move from oil into
new sources of energy
and the effect it's
having on our economy.
The price we pay for food.
And the way we get ourselves
from point A to point B.
All these things and
more are creating
what is now being
called a new normal.
>>LISA: These are all survival
related issues though.
These cause death.
They famine.
They cause drought.
I mean these are--
it's not like we're
talking about lofty politics.
>>BRADEN: Not anymore.
You know, these are.
They're big things
in all of our lives.
And this is the key.
We can no longer separate
the things from the big world
out there from what's happening
in our everyday lives.
There's a tendency to do that.
And there has been a
reluctance in the mainstream.
And this is why I'm so
honored to be here with you
and to be able to share
this with our audience.
There has been a
reluctance, and some cases,
a flat out resistance
in the mainstream media
to share the facts of
what this new normal is.
And I want to be very clear.
It's not about making anyone
wrong or making anyone right.
But the question I ask myself
all the time, Lisa, is this.
We are living in a
time of extremes.
How can we deal
with the extremes
if we're not honest with
ourselves about the extremes?
And that comes
down to the facts.
But there's a tendency, even
for the mainstream public.
We're so busy in
our everyday lives.
Taking our kids to
school, and trying
to put groceries on our table.
Going to work or
hoping to find work.
Who's got time to
think about this stuff?
But the key is,
it is by thinking
about these things that
helps us to navigate
the extremes in our lives.
And the fact is, the world
of the past no longer exists.
A new normal is
emerging, and many people
are clinging to an idea of
what the old world looks like,
waiting for things
to get back to normal
rather than embracing the
opportunities of right now.
And that's why I'm
excited to talk to you.
>>LISA: Yes.
Along with the
recession, people keep
trying to compare
today's numbers
to what was before 2008.
And it's not necessarily
going to happen again.
>>BRADEN: The economy.
They're trying to
compare the climate
to the way it was 10 years ago.
And I can tell you
as a geologist,
it makes no sense to do that.
>>LISA: So let's talk about
some of the statistics
from your book that you mention.
From 2012 just alone, it was
the world's ninth warmest
recorded year since 1850.
>>BRADEN: Sure.
Yeah, when we talk
about climate--
I'm just going to
preface this by saying,
as a geologist, when I began
hearing back in the 1970s about
climate change,
my first instinct
was to go to the Earth herself.
Let's let Earth tell her story.
So I'm not a politician.
I don't have any
political capital to gain.
I'm not an academic with
a reputation of defend.
I lost my reputation-- that
went out the window years ago,
so I'm not worried about that.
>>LISA: No, you didn't.
>>BRADEN: Or involved
with any corporations that
have something to gain from
anything other than the truth.
And I think we owe
it to ourselves
to honor ourselves
with the facts.
And when it comes to climate,
we're being told a story.
And it's a story that's
being perpetuated
through mainstream media.
The problem is, the
data doesn't support
this story in its entirety.
It's a fact.
We are having climate
change, that's the point.
Because the climate is changing,
what does it mean in our lives?
And if we're being led
to think that by changing
some light bulbs and driving a
smaller car, that we're going
to go back to the way the
climate was 10 years ago,
the facts simply don't
support that proposition.
>>LISA: So that's an
old message as well.
>>BRADEN: It is.
And there are four--
may I just share?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BRADEN: There are
four big questions
that I think we owe it
to ourselves to answer.
And the first question is, we're
being told that the greenhouse
gases are the cause
first of the warming.
And now we're not hearing
about warming so much anymore.
They just call it
climate change,
but the term "warming"
has dropped out.
That greenhouse gases
are the problem.
When we look at the ice cores
from Greenland and Antarctica,
for example, every year-- I
think most of our listeners
are familiar with
this-- every year
there's a new layer of ice
that captures information.
Little bubbles of air
in the atmosphere,
dust particles, pollen
grains, tells us
a lot about our history.
In the Antarctic cores we
now have the Vostok ice core
that revealed 420,000
layers of ice-- that's
420,000 years of the
history of the Earth--
to compare to right now.
To see what normal
really is all about.
And one of the first
things we can see
is that there are cycles, very
obvious cycles, 100,000 year
cycles.
41,000 year cycles,
21,000 year, 5,000 year
nested cycles where we
can expect these variances
in temperature.
And we happen to
be living in a time
where the data says we should be
living a warming and a change.
The question is how much.
And are the greenhouse
gases the cause?
>>LISA: So through those
420,000 years there are spikes
and different changes that
are visible in these cores.
>>BRADEN: Rhythmic spikes.
And that's the key.
>>LISA: OK, so we're in one
of those predicted spikes.
>>BRADEN: We are.
And you can see it very clearly.
But there are four questions
that I think, as I mentioned,
we owe it to
ourselves to answer.
And the first question is,
if the greenhouse gases are
causing this change,
you would expect
to see in the past a rise in
those greenhouse gases first
and then the rise
in the temperature
spikes and the other things.
And what the data shows,
Lisa, is just the opposite.
It shows the
temperatures rise first.
And then that is followed by a
rise in the greenhouse gases.
And as a matter of fact,
when the greenhouse gases
begin to rise, you can
see on the Vostok ice
cores the temperatures
actually drop.
It leads to a cooling,
just the opposite
of what we're being told.
>>LISA: Why does that happen?
Pressure?
>>BRADEN: What it says, it says
if the temperature's rising
first and the greenhouse
gases follow--
there's a lag time
of 400 to 800 years--
it means the gasses cannot
be the cause of the warming.
And if they're not, we need
to get real about what is.
The second-- that's
the first question.
That's only the first question.
The second question is with
regard to the warming itself.
When we look at the
warming, new data--
this is all peer reviewed.
So this isn't speculation,
or hypothesis, or theory.
New data is showing, for
the last 2000 years--
now this is important.
This isn't caveman times.
This is within historic times.
The last 2,000 years, the
temperatures on the Earth
have been much warmer
than they are right
now, two to three times warmer.
And one of the most
pronounced was actually
called the Medieval
Warming Period, MWP,
800 to 1100 common era,
somewhere right around in there
depending on which
chart you're looking at.
But the point is,
the temperatures
have been warmer without the
carbon dioxide, the greenhouse
gases, to trigger the warming.
And the characteristic
of the warming
is that it happens-- it's
intense, it happens quickly,
and it's what happens after
the warming that's the problem.
And it's the cooling that
follows the warming that
is pronounced in the
northern hemisphere
where most of the land is,
where most of the people are,
and where most of
our food is grown.
So second question, why
do we have this warming
in the last 2,000 years without
the greenhouse gases causing
it?
The third question
that we're looking at,
why has the warming part of the
greenhouse warming fallen out?
We haven't had significant
warming since 1997.
While the models tell
us-- if the models are
correct-- the models
are telling us
it should be-- we should
keep warming and warming.
And just the opposite
is happening.
And the last question is, why
are we now having more ice,
thicker ice, more
ice in Antarctica?
>>LISA: Because the
opposite was predicted.
>>BRADEN: Exactly
the opposite was.
And the irony is that when the
Climate Assessment came out
this year telling us how bad
the warming was supposed to be,
the irony was that there was
a ship stuck in the ice that
is now forming in Antarctica.
And the ships that went
in to help save everybody,
that ship got stuck in
the ice because the ice
is so massive right now.
So these are four questions.
Again, it's not about
right, wrong, good, or bad.
It's about being
honest with ourselves.
Because if we're barking
up the wrong tree
and if we're thinking
incorrectly about climate,
how can we adapt to what the
changes really mean to us?
And really honor
ourselves to do that?
>>LISA: I have to
ask, do you believe
that this weather-- the
prediction of course
was not correct.
But is it being manipulated by
cloud seeding, or vaporization,
or anything?
>>BRADEN: The weather itself?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BRADEN: You know, I don't have
firsthand knowledge of that,
Lisa.
And as a scientist
what I can say is I
can only speak to the facts.
And I think the truth is
we're in uncharted territory.
In the modern world nobody's
ever seen this happen.
And there are people
whose reputations
are staked upon their story and
they're going to stick to it.
There are climate models,
computerized climate models.
But here's the problem
with the models.
The models haven't
been right so far.
And as a computer scientist-- my
background is computer science,
I understand that.
But here's where
I get concerned.
Is that even when we plug in
the data for what has already
happened to correct
the models, they still
are not accurate about
telling us where we are now.
So the models are
so far-- there's
something missing in
the models, something
that we are not incorporating
into these facts.
So the question is-- and I
just, I want to say this--
if the CO2 is not causing it and
the change is absolutely here,
I mean it's obvious the change
is here, what is causing it?
There was a very
profound study that
was published by the
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences
in the year 2000.
I call it the
inconvenient chart.
It's an amazing
chart of the energy
from the sun reaching
the Earth over time.
And what it shows are peaks
and valleys of intensity.
The sun's energy is
not always the same
when it reaches the Earth.
And it is linked to the
tilt, the angle, the wobble,
and the orbit of our
planet in space in relation
to the sun over long
periods of time.
So no one living today
remembers the last time
we went through these things.
But the key is that the
statistics, the charts, they
show very, very clearly that
we are living a time when
this energy is spiking briefly.
There's a small
spike in the energy
that we're receiving
from the sun.
And there is a growing number
of scientists and a growing
consensus that this is
probably driving the change.
And this is my concern.
Because historically, the
spike is intense, it's brief,
and it falls off quickly.
>>LISA: For how
long does it spike?
>>BRADEN: It can
happen over decades,
which is where we are right now.
And then it falls off
quickly into-- I'm not
going to say an ice
age-- but into a cooling.
And it doesn't take much
of a cooling to impact us,
the way we live, our
opportunity to grow food,
when the rains come that we've
come to rely upon for our crops
and for major
metropolitan cities.
40% of the United States is
in a major drought right now,
the first time
we've ever seen this
since they began keeping
weather records in 1888
was the first year National
Weather Service started
keeping the records.
California.
>>LISA: Yes and
there are no plans.
I mean, I heard this
morning on the news
that there's only enough water
to sustain us for another year
and half if there are
no rains that come.
And then it will be--
>>BRADEN: Precisely.
And we've never
seen this before.
So this is why there
are people that
are accusing anyone who
questions the climate
story as a climate denier.
And I want to be
really clear, nothing
could be further from the truth.
We are in the middle
of a big change.
That's precisely the point.
And as I've said, we
owe it to ourselves
to be honest about the facts
so that we can responsibly
adapt to the new normal of
climate that in all likelihood
is going to be with us the
remainder of our lifetime
and probably through your
daughter's lifetime as well.
>>LISA: So extremes
are the new norm.
Let me ask you a question
about what you just
said about 1997 being
the peak of heat.
So we're now a decade
or so after that.
Are you saying that
we're heading into this.
>>BRADEN: I'm saying that
the warming hasn't continued
the way the models predicted.
If you remember some of
the very frightening--
the media really grabbed this
with amazing computer graphics
and showed those very
frightening projections
of Manhattan 20 years from now
with tumbleweeds blowing down
the scorched street
and cow bones laying
in the middle of the road.
And the sense that--
it was linear.
And the data simply
doesn't support it.
It's not showing
that it's linear.
It means there's something
wrong with the model.
And rather than
honoring that and saying
there's something we don't know,
there are a lot of politics,
there's a lot of money, a
lot of ego, a lot of habit,
all these things in the mix.
>>LISA: A lot of investment.
>>BRADEN: Yeah, in the mix.
And when we talk about the
extremes, it's interesting,
it's only extreme when you
compare it to something else.
>>LISA: Well, a lot
of the statistics do.
That we have record high
temperatures in the US with 197
all time highs and that there's
worldwide been 2 and 1/2
fold increase in the number
of devastating floods
and an increasing amount of
North American tropical storms.
>>BRADEN: And a snow storm in
Syria, where the-- in Lebanon
where the Syrian--
160,000 Syrian refugees in
tents in the Middle
East, where this
is the last thing we expect.
And to see the rain turn to
sleet and snow in that time.
And what, 32 foot
waves with hurricane
Sandy in New Your Harbor.
We've never seen this kind of--
>>LISA: New York Harbor.
So how do you have drought and
floods in the same country?
What is that dynamic?
>>BRADEN: It's an imbalance.
And a lot of what's
happening-- I'm
a geologist, an earth scientist.
I'm not a climate scientist.
But the two are
very closely related
because through
the earth we look
at the climate of the past.
And one of the factors
is that our jet stream,
the characteristics of the
jet stream, are changing.
Some people say the jet
stream is breaking down.
The jet stream has
always been kind
of a barrier between the
very cold air from the north
and the moist warm air
coming out of the south.
I was with a group in
the Yucatan Peninsula,
in the jungles of Mexico
in late December of 2013
and early into January.
And when it's
supposed to be dry,
and pretty warm, and pretty
nice on the beaches in Mexico.
It was cold, it was rainy, it
was overcast for days on end.
Because that jet
stream is breaking down
and allowing those
weather patterns to mix.
>>LISA: To come down.
It's interesting.
So in saying that we
are in this, extremes
are the new norm, what
does that do for us now?
How does that impact us?
>>BRADEN: Yeah, that's
a good question, Lisa.
And for me it makes sense that
I think the first step-- there
is a tendency, it's something
called normalcy bias.
Normalcy bias is
our tendency to look
at facts that impact
our lives in a big way
and discount them or try to take
the rough edges off and smooth
everything into normalcy.
>>LISA: Or if it's not
happening in our own backyard,
we shut out.
>>BRADEN: There are
beautiful examples of this.
There's stories of
Twin Towers, 9/11,
people who successfully
left the towers
and remember their computers
were still on in their desk.
They went back up into
the towers to power
down their computer and
lock their desk drawer
so that everything
would be safe.
And they were caught when
the buildings collapsed.
Normalcy.
Or the classic example is
Europe in World War II.
People in the ghettos seeing
their families and neighbors
being loaded onto boxcars.
They had heard the stories
of what was about to happen
but they didn't
want to believe it.
They wanted to believe
they were being relocated
to nice, new lives in
a new land somewhere.
And that was because it's
so hard to accept that.
So that's an extreme.
But the normalcy bias, it's
easy for people to say this.
And you hear it all the time.
Stay the course, things
will go back to normal.
Stay the course
with the economy.
It's going to go
back the way it was.
Stay the course
with-- just hang on
and everything's going to
go back the way it was.
It will be OK.
And the problem with that
is every time now we get
hit with one of these
storms we act surprised,
as if we were caught off guard.
>>LISA: It's major news.
And the news does blow it up.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
So what do you do?
If you know that you're
in a time of extremes,
you stop building homes, and
schools, and office buildings
on the floodplain
next to a river
that you know is going to flood
every year when the rains come.
When the high winds blow
down those power lines,
for example, people were without
power in eastern seaboard
after Hurricane Sandy
over two months.
And part of that was
they had a shortage.
They couldn't get the telephone
poles out of the south up
into the area to put
the power lines back
up into the air in that very
fragile network that we use.
If we know we're in a time of
extremes, bury the power lines.
And especially when
they're knocked down
when we go to rebuild them.
It's jobs.
There's jobs for people.
Bury them under the ground
like we do in many places.
I mean, these are
just some examples
of how it changes
the way we think.
>>LISA: What do you suggest?
Everyone buy a motor home?
>>BRADEN: No.
And I want to be really,
really clear with our audience.
When we talk about the
extremes it can sound scary.
But it's part of
a bigger picture.
We're looking at the
breakdown of many things,
whether it's the economy,
or whether it's jobs,
whether it's climate, whether
it's our relationship to oil,
peak oil in the middle--
all of those things
are breaking down because
they're unsustainable.
The way we've thought
about them in the past.
And this is why
I'm so optimistic.
It's because we are witnessing
the breakdown of so many things
that are unsustainable,
it opens the door
for all of the good news.
And the good news
is that we already
have the technological
solutions for the biggest
problems you could ever imagine.
We don't have to reinvent them.
We already have them.
We have all the food
to feed every mouth
of every child, every
woman, every man
on the face of the Earth today
right now at our fingertips.
The food's not the problem.
We have the ability to create
electricity and pump it
into the home of every family
the wants that electricity
without creating greenhouse
gases in a way that
can't be weaponized.
In a way that is inexpensive.
It's abundant, it sustainable,
we already have that.
What we're missing
is the thinking
that makes this a
priority in our lives.
And I believe that
the time of extremes
is the catalyst that opens
the door to that thinking
and says to us, maybe we need
to look at things a little
differently.
>>LISA: Do you really think so?
Because those
technologies, as I've
heard from many
different people,
are being suppressed
or taken out.
>>BRADEN: They have
been in the past.
>>LISA: OK, so where
is that technology?
>>BRADEN: They have
been in the past.
And it's a different
world, Lisa.
And what I'll say is it
is a different world.
And I think everyone knows
this world is changing.
I had a very interesting
program, a public seminar
that I was offering
on the east coast.
You never know who's going to
show up in the DC beltway area.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BRADEN: Interesting people.
And I had a man
that came up to me
who worked in one of
the agencies there.
And he said to me
confidentially--
just between you and
me and our viewers.
What he said was, "There was a
time we felt like we understood
what this change was all about
and we had a handle on what was
going on," he said,
"but we don't.
And he said-- and
this is the language
that I thought was interesting.
He said, "Something
is gone awry.
And we're trying to figure
out where everything's going."
And that's why I said,
"Why are you here?"
And he says, "I want to
see what your take is."
What they see-- whoever
they are-- what they see
is the awry, is
the wild card of us
and how we respond
to so much change.
The world is changing faster
than we have been prepared
to accept in ways
that we've never seen.
We have no blueprint.
And everyone to some degree
is in uncharted territory.
And to me that's why
I'm so optimistic.
It means that we've got to think
differently than we ever have.
And we're all in this together.
>>LISA: Well, I listen
to what you have to say.
I've been interviewing
you for over a decade now.
And I've watched the
books that you've come out
with always seeming
too not only dig deeply
into a subject that's
happening, where you've exposed
the fact that our Earth
is 11,000 years old.
And there's places--
>>BRADEN: A civilization.
A technological civilization.
>>LISA: In Gobekli Tepe.
And I've listened to
you for so long talk
about these things
that are really
transformative, changing.
And in a way, you're
telling us what's
going to happen in the
future, but not as a prophecy,
but as something
that is truly being
recorded this time in history.
So in all of your travels and
everywhere that you've gone,
to the monasteries in Tibet
and to your incredible, vast
travels to the Dead
Sea Scrolls, have you
ever heard about this time
in history prophesized?
This is a non-scientific
perspective for a second here.
>>BRADEN: Sure, yeah.
Almost universally
our ancestors-- well,
it's interesting.
This comes back to the cycles.
The geology is showing
us very clearly,
5,000 years ago Earth went
through a major climate shift.
And they've only recently
arrived at this conclusion.
We talk about climate
change, typically
we're talking about some time
way back during the dinosaurs.
People living in
caves, dinosaurs.
They're not thinking
about so recent.
So there hasn't been a
lot of study along that.
What happened was a
group of scientists,
they took information
from the Andes Mountains
in Peru, and from Bolivia,
and seafloor sediments
in the mountains
of the Himalayas,
and Greenland in the ice
cores, and all through Europe.
And they put it all together.
And all the data from
the different places
told the same story of a big
climate change 5,000 years ago.
Which is interesting
because 5,000 years ago is
when the cycles of
our indigenous people
say something big happened,
you can expect it again.
And they've been
doing their best
to prepare us through
their understanding.
It's not scientific, but it's
their spiritual relationship
to the earth.
And they said, you need
to take care of yourself
and take care of one another.
And honor the earth and be
able to grow your own food.
And they've said
it in these ways.
They've said, because this
is what we experienced.
And this is what
you'll experience
when it happens again.
But 5,000 years is a long time.
And that story has
been twisted, it's
been defused a
little bit, diluted.
But the answer is
when I travel outside
of the modern world-- we
call it the modern world,
the technological
world-- everyone's
expecting this change.
It's only the modern world
that acts surprised and has
been caught off guard and
says, oh climate change.
>>LISA: So what are they doing?
>>BRADEN: There are living
as they always have.
They live sustainably.
And one of the
things they've done--
and I think we can learn a
lot-- what they have done
is they've learned to
decentralize the way they live.
They decentralize the
growing of their food
into local community
areas so that when
there is a big change, a big
storm or something like that
happens, they have
everything they need.
They're not relying on it to
be shipped from somewhere else
like we are, many of us.
>>LISA: So they
grow their own food,
they have their
own water sources,
and they live like communities.
>>BRADEN: They live
like communities.
And there's a distinction.
There's two words, there's self
sufficiency and self-reliance.
They are as sufficient as
they can be within themselves.
But they are not opposed to
working with other people.
In other words, they
do the best they
can to take care of themselves
to be as strong as they can.
And then to share their wisdom,
their knowledge, and their good
with others in the community.
That's very different from
a survivalist that says,
I don't need anything.
In the true sense, survivalism,
you have only what you create
and you consume
only what you need.
And that's not what
this is all about.
This is all about community.
And I think community is
so important right now.
>>LISA: So how do you live?
I mean, you live in
northern New Mexico.
>>BRADEN: My wife and I live
in a sparsely populated area
in northern New Mexico.
We're an hour from the
nearest grocery store,
about a mile from
our nearest neighbor.
>>LISA: Do you have your own
water supply and food source?
>>BRADEN: The property
that I live on now, it
was a Waldorf school
built in the late 1800s.
And it was built for
self sustainability.
It was horribly dilapidated
when I bought it,
and it's an ongoing
renovation process.
It's like that-- what was that--
the movie about the money?
"The Money Pit?"
Where you just keep
putting money in?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BRADEN: We keep
putting money in.
And it's stuff you can't see.
It's all underground.
Pipes, and wells, and things.
But it had a couple
of good wells.
And we've learned how--
>>LISA: How to well
your own water?
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
And you know, a part of
this self sufficiency
and the change that
we're talking about.
A friend of mine and
a neighbor-- and I'm
going to share a
story because I think
it's a beautiful example
we can all relate to
of what it means to adapt
to our time of extremes.
He was a builder of green, very
sustainable homes, ecologically
sound homes back in
the-- well, for 30 years
he did this, up
until 2008 during
not only the economic crash
but the housing crash.
He lost everything.
And he had a crew of about 30,
35 people working with him.
And he couldn't provide
for them any longer.
He said, what am I going to do?
There's a very subtle,
very profound shift
that happened in this man.
His name is Steve and maybe
we can all relate to this.
Typically when we
lose everything,
we try to recreate--
because of normalcy bias
we try to recreate
what we've always
known another way
somewhere else.
And that's where the
struggle and the suffering
often comes from.
>>LISA: For safety though.
But that comes out of safety.
>>BRADEN: What Steve did,
he did something different.
He woke up one morning and
he didn't say, where can I
recreate what I've always done?
He said, what does
the world need?
my community need?
What does my family
need right now?
And the answer came
to him and said,
they need to be able to
take care of themselves.
And he woke up
the next morning--
he's a builder for 30
years-- and he said,
I'm not going to build homes.
He said, I'm going
to take my skills.
And he began to design,
prototype, and build
an innovative system of
raised bed self heating,
self watering
covered greenhouses
that would allow people to
grow their own food no matter
what the temperature, year
round, anywhere in the world.
And some of them,
they're modular.
Some of them are
12 inches square.
You can put them on
a patio in New York
if you don't have land.
Or they're four
feet by eight feet.
You can put them in a
series like we have,
because we have
land in New Mexico.
In January we were growing
broccoli, Swiss chard, lettuce.
It's 20 degrees
below zero outside.
And the key is that this
man is thriving in the worst
economic downturn
in the 80 years
because he let go of his
expectation of waiting
for things to get back
to normal and holding out
until he could
build his business.
What he said was, what
does the world need now?
And that's a powerful
shift of heart and mind
into recognizing that we
are community oriented.
And science is
actually supporting it.
Science has now discounted 150
years of Darwinian thinking,
telling us that nature is based
upon survival of the strongest.
That happens in
specific instances.
It's not the rule of nature.
What the best science of
our time is telling us
that nature is
based cooperation.
And what's called mutual aid.
Steve intuitively reflected
that in his question:
what does the community need?
How can I contribute and share?
>>LISA: How do you see
nature based in cooperation,
where there's-- we see the
perfect storm and all of that.
What do you see?
>>BRADEN: It's a very
good question, Lisa.
And people ask me, you say
nature's based in cooperation.
And I think maybe
the best example
is in the body that houses
the consciousness that's
sitting in this chair
with me right now.
Or my body, or your
body as a viewer.
We think we're individuals.
But we're actually made of about
50 trillion individual cells
that live as a community
and must cooperate and work
together to give us the level of
vitality and health to be here.
When it breaks down,
we call it disease.
If it breaks down far
enough, we call it death.
So in the very
essence of our being,
we are shown every
moment of every day
this fundamental principle
of nature, of cooperation.
And when you see the violent
competition-- it exists,
I'm not denying that--
when you see that,
it is showing us how
far we have strayed
from nature's truest
rule of cooperation.
And when that
violent competition
becomes so prevalent, as
it is in our societies
today, it's a really
good indication
of how far we have
strayed from this deepest
truth of our
relationship with nature.
And the indigenous people,
as you asked me earlier,
they share this with
me all the time.
They say, how do you
live in those cities?
It's crazy.
And I said, if everybody
leaves, how do you fix it?
And they say, OK, good point.
I'm paraphrasing, but.
>>LISA: No, it's not a bad idea.
I mean, it's the reason why
you live in a remote area.
But how do we live
in these cities?
How do we deal with
this juxtaposition
of violence and love
in the same state?
But what you're saying is
that the body constantly
strives for that
state of homeostasis.
And that we will as a society?
>>BRADEN: I think this is
where resilience comes in.
It's the subtitle of the
book, creating resilience
in a time of extremes.
The idea of resilience,
it means different things
to different people.
Historically, it's
about the ability
to spring back or return
to a normal functioning
after a trauma.
Like get things back to
normal after Hurricane Sandy.
>>LISA: Or the Arab Spring.
Think about things like that.
>>BRADEN: Or a family
loses their loved one
in the battlefield
of Afghanistan.
And they go back to work.
And they try to find--
create the resilience
to live their lives.
That's a good definition.
And it works, and
my question is,
is there another
form, an expanded form
of resilience, that allows
us to think and live
each day in a way that
makes room for the extremes?
In other words, we
incorporate the fact
that we're living the extremes
into our everyday lives
so that we're not surprised
when these things happen.
And the answer is yes.
It's called expanded resilience.
The Stockholm
Resilience Institute
is doing a lot of
work with this.
>>LISA: There's
a whole institute
on resilience in Stockholm
>>BRADEN: There is, because it's
such a vital part of our lives.
But the example that
I gave with Steve
going from building a
home, building green homes
to these modular
raised bed greenhouses,
that is a very good
example of creating
that resilience in his
life by simply changing
the way we ask that question.
In the old days, we used
to ask the question,
what can I get from
the world that exists?
Whenever we'd enter into
a relationship, a job,
a health care decision.
And if we lived in
the Darwinian world,
survival of the strongest, that
question actually makes sense.
But we don't live in that world.
So that means the question
now must change from,
what can I get from
the world that exists,
to what can I share?
What can I contribute?
What can I offer?
What can I give to the
world that's emerging?
And we're learning about
that in communities.
>>LISA: It seems
like the communities
is the kind of microcosm
to fix the microcosm.
Because fixing the
world at this point,
what do you see that
we have to go forward
in the next 10 years?
Do you see more, and
more, and more extremes?
>>BRADEN: I'm encouraged
by what I'm seeing.
And this is why
I said I've never
been more optimistic
about our lives.
I've never been more
optimistic about this nation.
The nation is going, US, a
lot of problems right now
and also a lot of opportunities.
I've never been more
optimistic about the world.
I have the opportunity
to see behind the scenes
as well as what the public sees.
A dear brother, a colleague
and friend of mine,
Doctor Bruce Lipton--
I know you've
worked with him in the
past-- he and I were invited
to speak at the United
Nations in October of 2013,
just a few months ago,
sharing this message
with some of the
innovators at the UN,
helping them to maybe hone
the direction of where
some of those programs can
go from this point forward.
>>LISA: How was that received?
>>BRADEN: Very well.
Because they invited us.
But it's because of the
recognition that something
has changed,
something's different.
This isn't the Cold War years.
It's not the 20th century.
We've got to think differently.
And that difference
is a subtle difference
of thinking about
survival of the strongest
and what's in it for me that
shift to recognizing that we
live in a world of
cooperation and mutual aid.
What can we give, or share,
or offer, or contribute.
And in that way we're
helping ourselves.
And it's all about community.
That's really what
it's all about.
>>LISA: I'm curious
to see if you
have had any resistance
to this message.
And you're always
able to tell me,
what has the opposition been?
>>BRADEN: Not really.
I haven't really had.
And I wouldn't expect that
I would have much resistance
because this isn't about
making anyone wrong.
It's not about attacking anyone.
It's about stating
truthfully, honestly,
factually the
information, the data.
And my sense is that
when we have the facts,
the choices become obvious.
When we have the facts,
we know what to do
and what choices to make.
Its when things don't
make sense to us.
And people say,
well just do this.
Or just do that.
Or television says do this.
Or your local
officials say do that.
And you're saying, well, why?
It doesn't make sense because
you don't have the facts.
The most resistance
that I have had
is from the media
itself, not from anyone
in any organizations,
political or government,
or anything like that.
And I think a lot of them
would like for this information
to get out.
And they don't know how
to go about doing it
because it sounds political.
Or it sounds, there's
so much mistrust.
But because I'm
not affiliated, I'm
kind of a neutral
party sharing this.
>>LISA: When you're saying that
the extremes are the new norm,
then it takes the sensationalism
out of it as well.
I mean, you can't have
a reporter standing
there with the blowing
winds and the palm trees
because this is, hi,
this is the new norm.
And then, I mean, it's not sexy.
But it makes sense, though,
what you're talking about.
So I had asked you when
you were on my radio
show about earthquakes.
And here we are in California.
And we haven't had a significant
earthquake for a long time.
And in certain areas when you
have a hurricane winds coming,
at least you get a
little bit of a warning.
And there's bunkers for
those types of situations
that hopefully
people can get into.
What happens when we are
shocked with an earthquake
here in California and
there is no warning?
>>BRADEN: Well, you know what
happens because you've seen it.
But the good news,
you say-- and this
was a key word-- there hasn't
been a significant earthquake.
As a geologist,
one of the things
that fascinated me-- and I
did a lot of my field work
in the Carpentaria Basin, which
is offshore of California.
And one of the things that
was so interesting to me
is the fact that there is so
much seismic activity here,
it almost never stops.
It is like a constant low
level rumble under the earth.
>>LISA: Has it always
been like that?
>>BRADEN: It's more so now.
And I can't say yes
or no, because I
think our equipment now is
better able to detect what
may have always been happening,
but we just didn't know it.
But the point is
that it used to be,
when you think of
the earth moving,
you say, OK it stops
at this time of the day
and it starts here.
And it's very
difficult now to tell
where one earthquake stops
and another one starts.
And the level one, level
two, on the Richter scale--
very low level rumbling, which
is actually the good news
because it means there's a
constant low level release
of the energy and the tension
that builds up along those
plates, rather than it being
totally quiet and then every,
60, 80, 100 years or so we
get this boom and everything--
>>LISA: Releases, yeah.
>>BRADEN: That's bat news.
So the good news is, there's
a constant release that
lessens the probability of
what's called the big one.
It doesn't mean
it cannot happen.
>>LISA: A lot of what
I've learned from you
through this interview and
reading the book is just
to be prepared.
I mean, it's something
that we hear all the time.
But get a situation together
where if there is an emergency,
you have food, you
have water, and you
have some energy source.
>>BRADEN: It makes sense because
of the reality that we face.
And I begin the book by saying,
when you go on a journey.
We all know the story.
When you go on a
journey, you find out
where you're going to go.
You check it out,
you pack what you
need to maintain your routines.
And when you find yourself going
somewhere you've never been,
you cover all the bases.
You prepare for
all eventualities.
And that's precisely
what this book is about.
We are on a journey.
We're not going to
a different place.
We're going to another world
within our lives right now.
And the fact that a new normal
is emerging and no one told us.
The mainstream,
there was no special
on BBC, or CNN, or a glossy
expose, the world of the past
is gone.
But the key here--
and we talk about this
in the live programs--
without the acknowledgement.
It doesn't have to be a big
ceremonial thing or anything.
But without the acknowledgement
that we no longer
live in the world that we
have come to trust and rely
upon in the past, we have never
been given the opportunity
to mourn the passing of a way
of life and a way of living.
And without that mourning,
it's difficult to let
it go to make room
for the opportunities
and the good things.
The avenues of
abundance that are here
for everyone right now.
But we've got to think
about money differently.
About economies differently.
About climate differently.
About energy differently.
And that's the new norm.
>>LISA: So we've
never really had
closure of the whole
recession conversation.
We've just been pushing
forward in multiple jobs,
and dealing with the
layoffs, and all of that.
But how do you make space
for that new abundance?
>>BRADEN: I think the
mourning of the passing.
And the live audience,
what I invite people to do
is just take a little--
unless they're driving a car
or operating heavy
machinery I ask them not
to-- but take a piece of
paper and just write down
what's different
in your life now.
What's missing now that
was not there 10 years ago?
And I know, even for me
there are things I miss.
There was a big
Borders Bookstore
that was a landmark in
Santa Fe, New Mexico.
I miss seeing it.
I miss little mom
and pop shops that
used to fix my Tony
Lama boots when
they get a hole in the bottom.
Or my glasses or whatever it is.
I miss that.
And it's not bad,
it's just saying,
you know, it's different.
And by doing that, it gives you
the opportunity for closure,
to let it go.
And then you say,
OK it served us.
It's not here any
longer, but this is here.
And my friend Steve
is a good example.
The Congressional Budget
Office, CBO of the United States
is telling us that the
economic environment that we're
seeing now we can expect
at least until 2023.
That means we can expect
very low interest rates.
It means it's hard to
make money on your savings
if you're looking to put
your kids through school
or retirement.
We can expect very
high unemployment.
We can expect industries as
we've known them in the past,
they're no longer with us.
That means those jobs
in our neighborhoods
are no longer there.
And we can expect the
devaluing of the currencies
that we're seeing.
All of that at least until 2023.
So people that are
waiting for the world
to get back to normal,
they're missing life.
Because that normal is gone.
It can't come back.
But if you can adapt to what
this new extreme is all about,
Steve is a perfect example.
He said, I'm not
going to recreate
the way I made my
living for 30 years.
He says, I'm going
to do something
I feel good about
that people need.
And this is the key.
What is it that people need?
Not what do they want.
What do they need?
And how can you help
contribute to fulfill that need
for your family, your
friends, your neighbors?
And by doing that you are
rewarded tremendously.
>>LISA: Well, at the same
time-- I mean in Los Angeles
particularly, this
winter didn't happen.
And we've had 80 degree
winter pretty much.
And I've said more than a few
times, I'm mourning winter.
Now, it's not just me missing
that time of coldness.
But what about nature?
What about the animals?
What about the--
what about the trees?
What about the fruits
and the vegetables
that didn't have
that opportunity
to go back into the ground,
to gather the nutrients so it
could explode in spring?
What about our ecosystem
that is mourning
winter in our particular area?
>>BRADEN: The ecosystem is
resilient in that it's already
finding its balance.
And the environmentalists
are amazed
at how quickly
this is happening,
how quickly plants are adapting.
And some of the insects
aren't, but they're
the insects that were causing
problems to begin with.
But a lot of the
plants are adapting
to shorter growing seasons
now, or multiple growing
seasons in the same.
>>LISA: Avocados are
having multiple harvests.
>>BRADEN: Exactly,
because they don't
have the emotional attachment
to the way something should be.
And if you think
about this, when
we talk about geologic
histories, big spans of time,
we have come to embrace
a way of living and being
that we thought would always
be this way, whether it's
technology, whether
it's climate.
Electricity is a
perfect example.
If you look at the brilliant
minds, late 1800s early 1900s,
the internal combustion engine.
Tesla and the power
grid that we have.
They all said we are
going to offer these now
to make your lives easier.
It's a stepping stone or a
bridge to what comes next.
It was never meant
to be the end.
It was meant as a bridge
or a stepping stone
toward a greater end.
We got stuck--
money, power, ego.
We got stuck on
internal combustion
engines, the burning of oil.
Oil is only a problem
when you burn it.
But there are 6,000 things
in our everyday lives
that we rely upon oil for.
And it has nothing to
do with combustion.
So we don't want
to demonize oil.
we don't want oil to go away.
But the burning of the
oil is the problem.
We can stop burning oil today
and use that precious resource
for all the other, the
medicines, and the delivery
systems for the medicine,
and the technology.
>>LISA: Everything we're
sitting here on right now.
>>BRADEN: The shell
if your cell phone,
your computer, all
kinds of things.
So there's a tendency to
demonize the oil, which
is I think is very unfortunate.
Because it's like throwing the
baby out with the bath water.
But the point is that we
grew accustomed to a world
and expected it
always to be that way.
And this is the generation
where it's changing.
And that transitional
generation,
the last time this happened
was 5,000 years ago.
>>LISA: And technology
didn't exist then also.
>>BRADEN: Not the way
that it is now, right.
>>LISA: The way that technology
is changing our environment
is leaping forward
exponentially every single day.
So that's a whole
nother adaptation
that people are going to
have to look forward to.
>>BRADEN: So the key,
rather than trying
to impose our idea of what
the world should look like,
trying to force the
climate to go back
to the way it was 10 years ago.
>>LISA: Or technology to
go back to the way it was.
>>BRADEN: Technology.
Our way of living, or
trying to force the economy.
The genie is out of the bag.
We've had nations that
had such great debt
that other nations
could bail them out.
We've never been in the place
where the debt of the planet
is greater than the
output of the planet.
Who bails out a planet?
And I don't know
the answer to that.
My sense is we're looking at
a huge shift, another program
which is tied to
climate and the economy.
A huge shift in the way we think
about economies and the way
we think about currency.
And I think that
will happen along
with all the other changes
that we're seeing now.
This is the new normal.
>>LISA: Well also, we're
going to be starting
to pull resources
from space now,
for new areas of life,
and living, and energy,
and all sorts of systems.
There's a lot of exploration
that's being done.
I don't know a lot about
it, but I've heard about it.
>>BRADEN: I've never
been more optimistic.
It's because we're at
a time-- biologists
call this a point of crisis.
They say crisis is the
trigger for evolution.
Crisis to some people
sounds like a bad thing.
But to me, if it is crisis--
if you want to use that term--
the good news is that
the crisis is still here,
which means we still have
time to do something about it.
If the crisis were behind
us, that means it's over
and the decision's been made.
So however we want
to look at it,
this is a pivotal,
precious turning point
in the history of civilization
and the history of our world.
And we have for the first time,
I think, the evolutionary edge.
And you just mentioned it.
Of the technology
that allows us,
that gives us the upper hand.
It's based in science.
But the key Lisa-- and this is
so important as a scientist.
Science doesn't have
all the answers.
Science can only
give us information.
And the wisdom to
use that information,
that comes from us.
And that is where
the 5,000 plus years
of the wisdom of our ancestors
comes into play right now.
Is it ancient wisdom?
Yes.
Is it obsolete?
No.
They understood that we're
related to one another,
were related to the Earth.
We need to honor our bodies, and
our Earth, and our relationship
to the Earth as we
make these decisions.
And if we do that, I don't
think we can go wrong.
>>BRADEN: We'll
that's why you didn't
call the book,
The Tipping Point.
You called it The Turning Point.
>>BRADEN: Tipping points
are the frightening moments
of no return.
Too much CO2, for example, and
the climate is beyond repair.
Or too much debt and
the economy collapses.
The experts are really
good at telling us
about tipping points,
frightening tipping
points of no return.
What they neglect to tell us is
before you ever reach a tipping
point, you must pass
through the turning point.
It's nature's way
of creating change.
The turning point
that says we never
have to have those
frightening experiences.
And that's what I want to
leave our listeners with today.
I think it's good
to honor ourselves
by acknowledging the degree,
the depth of the change,
a time of extremes.
But the turning points
promise, they hold the promise,
that we may choose and
avoid that suffering
to great abundance.
And my sense is that
we are on the precipice
of the most beautiful world
and the most beautiful way
of being as a global community
that we've ever seen.
>>LISA: If you'd like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Gregg Braden and watch
any of the other shows
I've done with Gregg you
could go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I always
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]